# Online Learning

This course uses a **flipped classroom** approach. This means that class time is not used for conveying information, the way a normal lecture-based class operates. The lectures are all online, and class time is used as an opportunity for students to discuss the course material, practice their skills, and ask questions from the teaching team.

The design of this course recognizes that online learning is fundamentally different from classroom-based, face-to-face (f2f) learning. Watching a 40 minute (or longer) lecture online is neither fun nor easy. For this reason, lectures are short, with videos kept well under 10 minutes in length. This makes them more modular, smaller "chunks" that are hopefully easier to digest and remember, and refer to later. Much of the content is available in both video format, and written in this online textbook. This is intended to accommodate different learning styles and environments; as well, it's often easier to search text for a specific bit of information, than to find it again in a video.

While there are some recorded lectures by the me, this course relies extensively on an online teaching platform called [**DataCamp**](https://datacamp.com). DataCamp is described in more detail in Chapter 2 {doc}`2/datacamp`. DataCamp is free to use by university professors in classes, and it allows you to learn the fundamentals of Python and data science with sophisticated and professionally-designed materials, including lectures and exercises. Given the high quality and free availability of this platform, there is no need to re-invent that wheel, so to speak. Instead, what this course will do is build on the skills you learn in DataCamp lessons, by figuring out how to apply them to real neuroscience data through structured exercises. This course will also provide you with individualized support and guidance that is not available through DataCamp.

The course makes extensive use of digital technologies for data science, communication, and collaboration. Beyond DataCamp, we use tools such as YouTube for course lectures, Collaborate Ultra or Zoom for synchronous class communication, Slack for asynchronous class communication, Microsoft Azure for cloud computing, and GitHub for cloud storage, file management, and project management. We will also make slight use of Dalhousie's Brightspace learning management system (LMS), primarily as a secure way of providing you with your grades. 
