# Expectations

This course is also taught from a fundamental premise that might be different than you have experienced before. *I assume that you are taking this course because you genuinely want to meet the stated learning objectives of the course*. That is to say, you are not taking this course just because you need a credit towards your degree, or because you think it will improve your GPA. Moreover, one of the learning objectives of this course is that by the end, you will *be able to demonstrate a professional work ethic*. Although this is a university course, it is framed to emulate a professional work environment. This means that you are expected to take responsibility for your own learning and performance, and also to support the learning and performance of your peers.

You should not view the members of the teaching team (instructor, TA) as opponents, but as guides and consultants. Although ultimately we will assign each of you a grade, our primary role is to support your learning, and help you achieve your best possible performance. At the same time, you should not expect that the teaching team will give you everything you need to succeed — a key part of taking responsibility for your own learning and performance is that you actively engage in finding the information you need, and teaching yourself how to do things, often through trial and error. The teaching team is not here to give you all the answers; rather, we are here to provide you with the skills to learn and find the answers you need. This may involve finding documentation, tutorials, and examples on the web, talking with your peers, or asking specific questions of the teaching team — questions that demonstrate that you've already tried to solve the problem yourself, and have identified the thing that you're stuck on. This is to say, you should not view the course instructor as a "sage on the stage" (especially since there is no stage), but rather as your "guide on the side".
