# Teaching Approach

This course was designed from the ground up as an online course, with optional in-person labs. The initial impetus for this was the COVID-19 pandemic, and associated lockdown. The need for the course was evident prior to the pandemic, but the need for online courses to fulfil a laboratory component in our curriculum proved to be the tipping point for me to start actually creating the course. A course in data science naturally lends itself to online teaching, because all of the tools rely on equipment that students almost universally already have at home: a computer. Recognizing that not everyone has a particularly powerful computer, however, this class will rely on cloud computing resources — so the particular specifications of your computer shouldn't matter much, as long as you have decent internet access.

As you saw in the course learning objectives, *this course aims to provide you with training not only in working with data, but in working on projects in a team-based virtual/remote working environment*. Already, this form of working was common for people in tech-related fields, and many software and tech companies support remote working by their employees. [We can only expect this to be more common in the post-pandemic world](https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/twitter-work-from-home-permanent-1.5567514), so this course will provide you with practical experience and skills for the future of work.

Since this is the first online course I have ever designed or taught, I have engaged in extensive research on best practices for online teaching. It turns out, many of these are really best practices in teaching, period. The online environment has forced instructional designers to address issues such as students participating asynchronously (rather than all showing up for class at a designated time), distractions, short attention spans, and even the nature of how students' work is assessed. Embracing these best practices creates a very different course than you have likely encountered before — and hopefully one that is more engaging and enjoyable in the process!
