# Data

“**Data**” are, ultimately, information. (Note that I write "are" - I consider data to be a mass noun, like "sand", and not a count noun, like "sandwich". The singular of data is **datum**.) My favourite definition of **information** is, "a difference that makes a difference" (Bateson, 1972)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steps_to_an_Ecology_of_Mind]. If we measure something, and it's always the same, then there is no information. Difference is the heart of information. But, differences can be meaningful in some way (signal), or meaningless, such as variation due to random factors (noise). Information are those differences that mean something — that make a difference.

In neuroscience, psychology, and other fields, data comprises all the information you might collect in a study. The types of data collected in neuroscience research spans such a wide range that it would be impossible to document them concisely here. To give a sense of the breadth of what we might call data, we can consider that data are typically collected from individual “units”, be they humans, non-human animals, cells, etc.. Each "unit" would contribute data, including things such as age, sex, handedness, genotype, cell type, early experience (e.g., monocular deprivation), responses to questionnaires, behavioural responses (e.g., reaction times, button or lever presses, maze running patterns or times), electrophysiological measurements, images, sound files, or movies of behaviour. For the purposes of this class we assume that the data are collected in some way, and stored digitally in files, typically as numbers or characters (words, sentences, etc.) — remembering that digital media like movies or sounds are, ultimately, files composed of numbers.

Ultimately, data science is about identifying meaningful patterns in data — and how to get there. Data may need various kinds of preparation or "cleaning" to strip away noise and more easily identify systematic patterns. Meaning can be derived in many ways, such as through visualizations (graphing), statistical analysis, or making predictions about future data. These are all ways of identifying systematic patterns in data.

A mindset that differs quite dramatically in data science, as compared to the basic statistics taught in undergraduate psychology and neuroscience curricula, is that it tends to be more exploratory. In experimentally-oriented disciplines such as psychology and neuroscience, statistics are a natural approach to deriving meaning from data. This is because data typically come from experiments, in which the research systematically and intentionally manipulated certain variables. A good experiment is **hypothesis-driven**, meaning that the researcher has predictions in advance as to how the data will systematically vary with the experimental manipulations. These predictions are usually based on past experimental findings, or models of the process being studied. Statistics are fundamentally embedded in data science — and indeed, the concept of "data science" as a discipline emerged from the field of statistics — but data science can be thought of as a larger set of practices the includes statistics, machine learning, data cleaning and transformations, and visualization. Many of these approaches are more **exploratory** than hypothesis-driven. That is, rather than looking for a specific, predicted pattern, the data scientist explores the data to find systematic patterns that may emerge from the data. For instance, researchers using techniques like fMRI have attempted to "decode" specific patterns of brain activity, such as what picture a person is viewing. These lines of research explore a variety of ways to transform the data, and a variety of machine learning approaches to make predictions about what the person is seeing. The goal is to identify the data processing **pipeline** that makes the most accurate predictions

If this feels like we're getting a bit off the topic of defining "data", here's how it connects: data is the "stuff" we can apply all these data science techniques to, and the aim of working with data is to find meaning in it. In doing data science, we focus less on the process of acquiring the data, and more on what we do after it's collected. On the other hand, it is important to understand what your data are, which includes what was being measured, and how it was collected. Our approaches to working with the timing of action potentials of single neurons, Morris water maze behaviour in rats, human reaction times, and functional MRI data will necessarily be different, according to our understanding of what was measured, and the underlying physiological properties. At the same time, all of these are ultimately measurements stored in data files, and data science is about learning the core skills that allow you to work with any of these data types and try to find meaning in them. 
