# MS Teams

We will use Dalhousie's Microsoft Teams service as the learning management system (LMS). This will be your central hub for completing the course. We will use some software tools within Teams, including text messaging, video calls for synchronous classes, submitting assignments, and viewing course videos. As well, the class Teams site has links to all external resources, including the syllabus, schedule, and DataCamp tutorials (see below).

An added advantage of using Teams, from the perspective of course learning objectives, is that Teams is not just an LMS — it is a platform that professional organizations the world over use, especially since the COVID-19 pandemic and the tidal shift to remote working. Prior to the pandemic, in mid-2019, Teams was already being used by more than [half a million organizations](https://news.microsoft.com/europe/2019/03/27/the-future-of-work-these-companies-are-using-microsoft-teams-to-take-collaboration-to-a-whole-new-level/), and over [13 million active daily users](https://www.geekwire.com/2019/heres-many-people-use-microsoft-teams-every-day-compares-rival-slack/). In a striking demonstrating of the impact of COVID-19 on the transition to remote working, Microsoft reported 32 m active users on March 11, 2020 (already impressive 1 year growth), but 44 m just a week later, on March 18. Major companies like Air France and (obviously) Microsoft use it, as to countless nonprofits and universities, including Dalhousie University. At Dalhousie, Teams has rapidly become the central platform that the university administration runs on and conducts its communications through, including holding meetings.

Once you are registered in the class, you will receive an email invitation to the class Teams site. You will use your Dal.ca netID with Teams. Assignment 1 will take you through onboarding on to the class Teams page.
